The freedom to die

I think there is freedom in the idea of death. 

Death has a terrible reputation, and unsurprisingly so. Death doesn't seem
to be pleasent and i am very sure that it must not feel pleasant to die
either, especially by ways like being mashed under the wheels of a truck. 
Plus we lose whoever dies, forever. Yes, the memories of that person
remain, both good and bad ones, but to compare such an abstract thing
with the literal physical existence of a human being is just ridiculous.
Whoever dies, dies. Irrespective of how much you and your community misses them.

Anyway, there is a another side to death as well that makes
it even more complicated. The religious or spiritual side. Concepts like karma and afterlife
give meaning to death, both in a good and bad way. 

Some social constructs and rules are simply ridiculous and if one spends his whole life optimizing his life to achieve heaven and avoid hell, it would be a rather
constrained life. I for instance, understand some people not willing to eat
non-veg food on thursdays or so, due to their religious beliefs and their
justifications of what's right or wrong, and i respect their conviction in
this regard. However, i will never let go of a good meal, no matter which
day of the week it is. Because, as much lies i have seen in the world, i am fairly skeptical of optimizing my life for a place that might not even
exist.

I fail to see any inherent meaning in death. I don't see it as anything
grand. I see it as an end of a natural series of events. But this doesn't
make me any less human, and irrespective of my logical understanding of
death and how well i am able to see it from a bird's eye view, it is safe
to assume that i will be devasted by death of anybody i am close to. The
closer the person, the more it'll fundamentally break me.

But even then, even after the fact that i see no inherent meaning in it and that i will be equally devasted by it, i think there is some beauty to it.
Because something doesn't need to be justifiable to be beautiful.

I find it interesting for a multitude of reasons. First of which is that
sometimes, death can be kinder than life. Somebody's death can
also be kind to somebody else's life. So it is but a partial argument that
death is always bad and evil, and it is our sole purpose to avoid or atleast postpone it to the best of our abilities. I believe, sometimes it can also be relief.

Now, i do realise the things i have said and how debatable their moral
grounds are. But i believe them to be true. It's a morally grey argument,
yes, and perhaps a terrible thing to point out (because questions arise, 
like, who decides when death is kinder than life and under which criterias
and whether the criterias are morally right, even if they are logically
sound) but it is something worth thinking about.


And yes, i have said that i find no inherent meaning in death. But that
does not mean that some meaning cannot be given to it. We all have our
own definitions of a meaningful death, whether we have articulated it or
not. You can see this when people react like "oh god, that's fucking
terrible" vs when they say "he died an honorable death", in fact 
irrespective of the how the person died, the value of the person in the 
eyes of the crowd can change the reaction. So yes, even if there is no
inherent meaning, there is almost always meaning.


And i believe such meaning is directly proportional to how deeply connected
you are to the web of people around you and beyond. In fact, i believe, when you are loosely connected to the web of people, in other words, there are
not many people who are close to you, you possess a certain kind of freedom to
die. The freedom is perhaps of the same nature as when you have the autonomy over what to eat that night for dinner or how long to stay out, but taken
to a much extreme level.

But the more you are embedded in the web of people, the more accountable
you become for your own death. Your death is no longer just your death, it
is also a disaster for your partner, parents or friends. 

And I think that's the cost of being so alive. Of being so deeply engaged with people
and your sorroundings. You lose the freedom to die. But on the upside, you have the priviledge to die what they call a meaningful death.


